feat: Add CLP UDF docs (#75)
y-scope/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/clp.rst

``status``, ``thread_num``, ``backtrace``) become fields within the ``ROW``, clearly reflecting the nested and varying
structures of the original JSON logs.

CLP Functions

> -------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*************
CLP functions
*************
```
heading level and capitalization

In semi-structured logs, the number of potential keys can grow significantly, resulting in extremely wide Presto tables
with many columns. To manage this complexity, the metadata provider may expose only a subset of the full schema,
typically the static fields or those most relevant to expected queries.

To enable access to dynamic or less common fields not present in the exposed schema, CLP provides two set of functions
to help users query flexible log schemas while keeping the table metadata definition concise. These functions are only

> available in the CLP connector and are not part of standard Presto SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semi-structured logs can have many potential keys, which can lead to very wide Presto tables. To keep table metadata
concise and still preserve access to dynamic fields, the connector provides two sets of functions that are specific to
the CLP connector. These functions are not part of standard Presto SQL.
```
I think this should be more concise; if I have compromised the meaning, let me know

- JSON path functions (e.g., ``CLP_GET_STRING``)
- Wildcard column matching functions for use in filter predicates (e.g., ``CLP_WILDCARD_STRING_COLUMN``)

There is **no performance penalty** for using these functions. During query optimization, they are rewritten into
references to actual schema-backed columns or valid symbols in KQL queries. This avoids additional parsing overhead and

> delivers performance comparable to querying standard columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is **no performance penalty** when using these functions. During query optimization, the connector rewrites these
functions into references to concrete schema-backed columns or valid symbols in KQL queries. This avoids additional
parsing overhead and delivers performance comparable to querying standard columns.
```
flow; active voice

Path-Based Functions

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Path-based functions
====================
```
heading level and capitalization

.. function:: CLP_GET_STRING(varchar) -> varchar

>     Returns the string value of the given JSON path, where the column type is one of: ``ClpString``, ``VarString``, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the string value at the given JSON path, where the column type is one of: ``ClpString``, ``VarString``, or
```
it should really be "at"

    ``DateString``. Returns a Presto ``VARCHAR``.

.. function:: CLP_GET_BIGINT(varchar) -> bigint

>     Returns the integer value of the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Integer``, Returns a Presto ``BIGINT``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the integer value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Integer``, Returns a Presto ``BIGINT``.
```

.. function:: CLP_GET_DOUBLE(varchar) -> double

>     Returns the double value of the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Float``.  Returns a Presto ``DOUBLE``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the double value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Float``.  Returns a Presto ``DOUBLE``.
```

.. function:: CLP_GET_BOOL(varchar) -> boolean

>     Returns the double value of the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Boolean``. Returns a Presto ``BOOLEAN``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the boolean value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Boolean``. Returns a Presto
    ``BOOLEAN``.
```
"at"; return type

.. function:: CLP_GET_STRING_ARRAY(varchar) -> array(varchar)

>     Returns the array value of the given JSON path, where the column type is ``UnstructuredArray`` and converts each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the array value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``UnstructuredArray`` and converts each
```

    element into a string. Returns a Presto ``ARRAY(VARCHAR)``.

.. note::

   - JSON paths must be **constant string literals**; variables are not supported.

>    - Wildcards (e.g., ``msg.*.ts``) are **not supported**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Wildcards (e.g., ``msg.*.ts``) are **not supported**, as paths use dot notation.
```
clarity

Author: I believe this is supported in CLP-S KQL, which also uses dot notation, but it isn’t supported here.

   - If a path is invalid or missing, the function returns ``NULL`` rather than raising an error.

> Examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples
--------
```
this should be a heading

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT CLP_GET_STRING(msg.author) AS author
    FROM clp.default.table_1
    WHERE CLP_GET_INT('msg.timestamp') > 1620000000;

    SELECT CLP_GET_STRING_ARRAY(msg.tags) AS tags
    FROM clp.default.table_2
    WHERE CLP_GET_BOOL('msg.is_active') = true;

Wildcard Column Functions

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wildcard column functions
=========================
```
heading level and capitalization

These functions are used to apply filter predicates across all columns of a certain type. They are useful for searching
across unknown or dynamic schemas without specifying exact column names. Similar to the path-based functions, these
functions are rewritten during query optimization to a KQL query that matches the appropriate columns.

.. function:: CLP_WILDCARD_STRING_COLUMN() -> varchar

>    Represents all columns of CLP types: ``ClpString``, ``VarString``, and ``DateString``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Represents all columns whose CLP types are ``ClpString``, ``VarString``, or ``DateString``.
```
flow

.. function:: CLP_WILDCARD_INT_COLUMN() -> bigint

>    Represents all columns of CLP type: ``Integer``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Represents all columns whose CLP type is ``Integer``.
```

.. function:: CLP_WILDCARD_FLOAT_COLUMN() -> double

>    Represents all columns of CLP type: ``Float``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Represents all columns whose CLP type is ``Float``.
```

.. function:: CLP_WILDCARD_BOOL_COLUMN() -> boolean

>    Represents all columns of CLP type: ``Boolean``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Represents all columns whose CLP type is ``Boolean``.
```

.. note::

   - They must appear **only in filter conditions** (`WHERE` clause). They cannot be selected or passed as arguments

>      to other functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Wildcard functions must appear **only in filter conditions** (`WHERE` clause). They cannot be selected and cannot
     be passed as arguments to other functions.
```
clarity

>    - Supported operators includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Supported operators include:
```

     ::

         =   (EQUAL)
         !=  (NOT_EQUAL)
         <   (LESS_THAN)
         <=  (LESS_THAN_OR_EQUAL)
         >   (GREATER_THAN)
         >=  (GREATER_THAN_OR_EQUAL)
         LIKE
         BETWEEN
         IN

     Use of other operators (e.g., arithmetic or function calls) with wildcard functions is not allowed and will result
     in a query error.

> Examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples
--------
```
this should be a heading

``status``, ``thread_num``, ``backtrace``) become fields within the ``ROW``, clearly reflecting the nested and varying
structures of the original JSON logs.

*************
CLP Functions
*************

Semi-structured logs can have many potential keys, which can lead to very wide Presto tables. To keep table metadata
concise and still preserve access to dynamic fields, the connector provides two sets of functions that are specific to
the CLP connector. These functions are not part of standard Presto SQL.

To enable access to dynamic or less common fields not present in the exposed schema, CLP provides two set of functions
to help users query flexible log schemas while keeping the table metadata definition concise. These functions are only

> available in the CLP connector and are not part of standard Presto SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semi-structured logs can have many potential keys, which can lead to very wide Presto tables. To keep table metadata
concise and still preserve access to dynamic fields, the connector provides two sets of functions that are specific to
the CLP connector. These functions are not part of standard Presto SQL.
```

These two paragraphs have duplicate information; I think just the first paragraph will do nicely.

- JSON path functions (e.g., ``CLP_GET_STRING``)
- Wildcard column matching functions for use in filter predicates (e.g., ``CLP_WILDCARD_STRING_COLUMN``)

There is **no performance penalty** when using these functions. During query optimization, the connector rewrites these

> functions to references to concrete schema-backed columns or valid symbols in KQL queries. This avoids additional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions into references to concrete schema-backed columns or valid symbols in KQL queries. This avoids additional
```
"to references to" sounds awkward because of the double "to"

parsing overhead and delivers performance comparable to querying standard columns.

Path-Based Functions
====================

.. function:: CLP_GET_STRING(varchar) -> varchar

    Returns the string value at the given JSON path, where the column type is one of: ``ClpString``, ``VarString``, or
    ``DateString``. Returns a Presto ``VARCHAR``.

.. function:: CLP_GET_BIGINT(varchar) -> bigint

>     Returns the integer value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Integer``, Returns a Presto ``BIGINT``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns the integer value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Integer``. Returns a Presto ``BIGINT``.
```

Path-based Functions
====================

.. function:: CLP_GET_STRING(varchar) -> varchar

    Returns the string value at the given JSON path, where the column type is one of: ``ClpString``, ``VarString``, or
    ``DateString``. Returns a Presto ``VARCHAR``.

.. function:: CLP_GET_BIGINT(varchar) -> bigint

    Returns the integer value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Integer``. Returns a Presto ``BIGINT``.

.. function:: CLP_GET_DOUBLE(varchar) -> double

    Returns the double value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Float``. Returns a Presto ``DOUBLE``.

.. function:: CLP_GET_BOOL(varchar) -> boolean

    Returns the boolean value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``Boolean``. Returns a Presto ``BOOLEAN``.

.. function:: CLP_GET_STRING_ARRAY(varchar) -> array(varchar)

    Returns the array value at the given JSON path, where the column type is ``UnstructuredArray`` and converts each
    element into a string. Returns a Presto ``ARRAY(VARCHAR)``.

.. note::

   - JSON paths must be **constant string literals**; variables are not supported.
   - Wildcards (e.g., ``msg.*.ts``) are **not supported**.

>    - If a path is invalid or missing, the function returns ``NULL`` rather than raising an error.

Reviewer 2: Do you think its worth elaborationg? i.e. "If a path is invalid or missing in a given record, "?

     be passed as arguments to other functions.
   - Supported operators include:

     ::

         =   (EQUAL)
         !=  (NOT_EQUAL)
         <   (LESS_THAN)
         <=  (LESS_THAN_OR_EQUAL)
         >   (GREATER_THAN)
         >=  (GREATER_THAN_OR_EQUAL)
         LIKE
         BETWEEN
         IN

     Use of other operators (e.g., arithmetic or function calls) with wildcard functions is not allowed and will result
     in a query error.

Examples
--------

.. code-block:: sql

   -- Matches if any string column contains "Beijing"
   SELECT *
   FROM clp.default.table_1
   WHERE CLP_WILDCARD_STRING_COLUMN() = 'Beijing';

   -- Matches if any integer column equals 1
   SELECT *
   FROM clp.default.table_2
   WHERE CLP_WILDCARD_INT_COLUMN() = 1;

JSON String Function
====================

The ``CLP_GET_JSON_STRING``` function provides a convenient way to retrieve the entire log record—including both
schema-backed and dynamic fields—as a single JSON string. This enables users to inspect, debug, or export complete
records in their raw JSON form.

Similar to the path-based and wildcard functions, this function is rewritten during query optimization to a special

> internal column. During query execution, this column is serialized into a JSON string that represents the full record.

Reviewer 2: It doesn't include metadata columns from splits right? Do you think its worth highlighting the distinction between JSON record and metadata columns here? I think it could be confusing to a reader thinking in terms of normal SQL records.

Author: It doesn't. Currently we don't have support of metadata projection, probably can edit it later when we have the support.

.. function:: CLP_GET_JSON_STRING() -> varchar

   Returns the full log record as a JSON string, preserving all schema-backed and dynamic fields.

.. note::

>    This function can only be used in the ``SELECT``` list to retrieve the complete JSON representation of each record.

Reviewer 2: Is "``SELECT`` list" common terminology? I think I'd expect something more like "list of projected columns in a ``SELECT`` statement", but we can keep the current working if "``SELECT`` list" is widespread.
